From generating functions to the geometric Binder cumulant Bal´azs Het´enyi1,2∗ 1 Department of Theoretical Physics, Budapest University of Technology and Economics, M˝uegyetem rkp. 3, H-1111 Budapest, Hungary and 2Institute for Solid State Physics and Optics, HUN-REN Wigner Research Centre for Physics, H-1525 Budapest, P. O. Box 49, Hungary ∗ (Dated: April 8, 2026) We present an overview of the role of generating functions in quantum mechanical contexts, mainly in the modern theory of polarization and in the study of quantum phase transitions. Generating functions enable the derivation of moments and cumulants, quantities which characterize the ﬂuctuations of an underlying probability distribution. In all of the cases we review, the ﬂuctuations are those of a quantum system. We show that the original formalism for geometric phases, in which a quantum system is taken around an adiabatic cycle, can be extended to the case when degeneracy points are encountered along the cycle (quasiadiabatic cycles). The essential tool for this extension is a generalized Bargmann invariant which plays the role of a generating function. From the cumulants generated this way one can form ratios according to the Binder cumulant scheme in statistical mechanics. Such geometric Binder cumulants are sensitive to gap closure, as such, they are useful in identifying metal-insulator transitions, localization, and quantum phase transitions. We present example calculations on simple model systems, whose localization properties are well known, to validate to approach. We also complement our geometric Binder cumulant calculations with results for the ﬁdelity susceptibility, a quantity directly related to the quantum geometry of the parameter space. ∗hetenyi.balazs@ttk.bme.hu arXiv:2604.06147v1 [quant-ph] 7 Apr 2026 CONTENTS I. Introduction 2 II. Basic ingredients 5 A. The problem of the polarization in crystalline systems 5 B. Generating functions, moments, cumulants 5 C. The excess kurtosis and the Binder cumulant 7 D. Berry phases 7 1. The Berry phase 7 2. The open path Berry phase (Zak phase) 8 3. The single point Berry phase 9 E. The generating function in quantum geometry 10 III. Generating functions in crystalline systems 10 A. Periodic probability distributions 10 B. The modern polarization theory for crystalline many-body systems 12 C. Gauge invariant cumulants 13 D. Generating functions for the Berry phase 13 E. Constructing the geometric Binder cumulant for quantum cycles 15 IV. Demonstrative examples 15 A. The Fermi sea 16 B. The Su-Schrieﬀer-Heeger model 17 C. Localization in the Aubry-Andr´e model 18 D. The Aubry-Andr´e transition through the ﬁdelity suscebtibility 19 V. Conclusion 22 Acknowledgements 23