Light-Induced Quantum Self-Trapping of Vibrational Excitons in an Optical Cavity Vincent Pouthier1 and Saad Yalouz2, ∗ 1Universit´e Marie et Louis Pasteur, CNRS, Institut UTINAM (UMR 6213), Equipe ϕth, F-25000 Besan¸con, France 2Laboratoire de Chimie Quantique de Strasbourg, Institut de Chimie, CNRS/Universit´e de Strasbourg, 4 rue Blaise Pascal, 67000 Strasbourg, France In an optical cavity, strong light–matter coupling between excitons and photons has been widely reported as a way to enhance energy delocalization through spatially extended polaritonic states. In contrast, leveraging cavity-mediated light–matter effects to promote the reciprocal phenomenon, namely energy localization, remains largely underexplored. In the present work, we address this question by focusing on a special form of energy localization arising from nonlinear matter interactions: Quantum Self-Trapping (QST). We employ a generalized Tavis–Cummings model to investigate the transport of vibrational excitons—i.e., vibrons—between two anharmonic vibrational modes and examine their interplay with cavity photons. In the absence of a cavity, the arising of true and complete QST—i.e., an infinite-lifetime localization—is not possible due to the symmetry of the system. The energy transfer between the two modes still occurs, slowed down by the many-body interactions. Coupling the system to a single-mode cavity strongly alters this behavior, with two emerging regimes. First, at weak light–matter coupling, destructive interference between newly opened transition pathways suppresses energy exchange, leading to cavity-enhanced self-trapping. As the coupling strength increases, these interference effects evolve leading to cavity-assisted energy transfer, where we observe an acceleration of the vibrational energy flow. Most notably, we identify critical coupling strengths that separate both regimes in which the dynamics almost totally freeze, suggesting the arising of a “stabilized” light-induced QST of many-vibron bound states. These results suggest that optical cavities can not only enhance transport but could also stabilize energy localization phenomena, providing a new route to control energy flow in quantum systems. I. INTRODUCTION Polaritonic chemistry and physics explore the novel behaviors that arise when molecules or materials couple to the confined electromagnetic field in a cavity. Under such conditions, hybrid light-matter quantum states, known as polaritons, form as coherent superpositions of photonic and matter excitations. These exotic states, which exhibit properties distinct from their uncoupled constituents, have been observed across a wide range of platforms, including electron spins [1], inorganic crystals [2–4], cold atoms [5–7], and semiconductors [8– 10]. Crucially, polaritonic states properties can be directly tuned by the cavity environment which conditions the strength and character of the light-matter interactions. This tunability has sparked growing interest in exploiting the resulting cavity-mediated light-matter effects to influence a variety of physicochemical processes. Examples include chemical reactivity [11, 12], molecular emission [13], and excited-state dynamics [14–17], among others. Within the broad range of applications enabled by light-matter interactions in cavity, the control of energy transport emerges as one of the most promising directions. In this framework, numerous theoretical and experimental studies have demonstrated that energy transfer processes can be modulated via a strong coupling between energy carriers—i.e., excitons—and cavity modes (see Refs. [18, 19] and